# 2.4 Routing Table

Kademlia's basic routing table structure is fairly straight-forward given the protocol, though a slight subtlety is needed to handle highly unbalanced trees. The routing table is a binary tree whose leaves are k-buckets. Each k-bucket contains nodes with some common prefix of their IDs. The prefix is the k-bucket's position in the binary tree. Thus, each k-bucket covers some range of the ID space, and together the k-buckets cover the entire 160-bit ID space with no overlap.

Nodes in the routing tree are allocated dynamically, as needed. Initially, a node u's routing tree has a single node—one k-bucket covering the entire ID space. When u learns of a new contact, it attempts to insert the contact in the appropriate k-bucket. If that bucket is not full, the new contact is simply inserted. Otherwise, if the k-bucket's range includes u's own node ID, then the bucket is split into two new buckets, the old contents divided between the two, and the insertion attempt repeated. If a k-bucket with a different range is full, the new contact is simply dropped.

One complication arises in highly unbalanced trees. Suppose node u joins the system and is the only node whose ID begins 000. Suppose further that the system already has more than k nodes with prefix 001. Every node with prefix 001 would have an empty k-bucket into which u should be inserted, yet u's bucket refresh would only notify k of the nodes. To avoid this problem, Kademlia nodes keep all valid contacts in a subtree of size at least k nodes, even if this requires splitting buckets in which the node's own ID does not reside.